>>REGINA MEREDITH: Welcome
to "Open Minds: On the Road."
We're here in Joshua
Tree, California
at Contact in the Desert.
In a moment, I'm going to be
speaking with Robert Salas.
During his career
in the military,
he witnessed nuclear silos
being shut down one by one
while a UFO hovered overhead.
[THEME MUSIC]
Robert, I'm glad to finally
have a chance to chat with you.
Many years ago, I think
it was early 2001,
I was at Disclosure.
And I originally met you at
Steven Greer's Disclosure
at the National Press
Club in Washington DC,
and what a powerful
event that was.
>>ROBERT SALAS: It really was.
It really was.
>>REGINA: And that's when
I first heard your story,
and that was 13 years ago.
And I've always wanted
to interview you.
Because for me, your
story exemplifies
what it's going to take to bring
the average person that really
can't conceive of this into the
fold, because it's undeniable.
So now that we've
referred to "it,"
why don't we start with your
story, what you were doing,
your position in the military,
the time, everything.
Just tell us your story.
>>SALAS: Well, in 1967, I was
a first lieutenant in the Air
Force, and I was stationed
in Malmstrom Air Force
Base, Montana.
I was a missile
launch officer, which
means there was a
crew of two of us
that went to the underground
facilities located
in the middle of a
wheat field in Montana.
>>REGINA: I mean
really obscure, right?
>>SALAS: Right.
>>REGINA: Where
no one would know
that that's where all the
activity during the Cold War
was happening.
>>SALAS: Well, yes.
We had some pretty
deadly weapons there.
Of course, these were nuclear
weapons, the Minuteman I
missile.
>>REGINA: What was the
range of the Minutemen?
Refresh us on what
was going and--
>>SALAS: OK.
You know, some of this,
even today, I really
should not talk about too
much, as far as targeting.
But let's say the
range of the missile
was far enough to
target our known enemies
at the time, our
strategic enemies.
>>REGINA: OK, so this
was during the Cold War,
so I think we understand
what that means.
>>SALAS: This was during
the Cold War, Vietnam War.
>>REGINA: Yes.
So anyway, you're out there.
And these are dotted
all over Montana,
these silos facilities?
>>SALAS: Yes.
We had 15 of these launch
control facilities,
each with 10 missiles--
controlling 10 missiles,
so that's 150 missiles.
We had- These
missiles were located
in kind of a ring around the
launch control facility itself.
>>REGINA: Were the locals aware
of what these facilities were?
>>SALAS: Oh, yes.
Yes.
>>REGINA: So the
people in Montana knew.
>>SALAS: Yes.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>SALAS: Because obviously,
we had the construction crews
come in first and make big
ditches in their wheat fields.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>SALAS: So yeah, they knew.
So the story we're
going to talk about
is-- happened to me
on March 24, 1967.
My commander Fred Mywald
and I were on duty
at Oscar Flight, which is about
100 miles east of Great Falls,
near a little town
called Roy, Montana.
Sometime in the evening,
after it was dark--
and I can't remember whether
it was early in the morning--
I tend to think it was
early in the morning-- I
get a call from
my topside guard.
And he's saying, well, sir,
we've been-- the guards
and I have been out
looking at the stars,
and we've been seeing some
strange, flying objects
up here, going at high
speeds, stopping on a dime,
reversing course,
making 90 degree turns,
not making any sounds.
>>REGINA: And at
very high speeds?
>>SALAS: Very high
speeds, very strange.
And they're not any kind of
aircraft that we know of.
And I even said,
you mean like UFOs?
And he said, well, sir,
we can't explain them,
and I just wanted to report it.
I said, OK.
Thank you for your report.
>>REGINA: Now, where were you?
You say he was topside, so that
indicates you were not topside.
Where were you?
>>SALAS: No, I'm sorry.
I was 60 feet underground in
a hardened, concrete and steel
capsule.
>>REGINA: So this is
extremely secure, I take it.
>>SALAS: Extremely secure.
>>REGINA: I mean, with
that many missiles,
it should be extremely secure.
>>SALAS: Yeah,
supposedly, we were
able to withstand a
nuclear blast overhead.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>SALAS: So this was a very
secure facility obviously.
>>REGINA: And is this where
the controls for the silo
are located,
underneath the ground?
>>SALAS: The controls
for all the missiles
were all located underground.
They had no controls
topside or ground level.
>>REGINA: Just setting the stage
for what's going to happen.
OK.
>>SALAS: Right.
And this is important point
because the first thing people
are going to want to think
is this was kind of a hoax.
It was perpetrated by
those guys upstairs.
It was not.
So anyway, this
first phone call,
I basically hung up
on him, thanked him.
I thought, you know,
it's a little strange.
This guy's a professional.
I knew the guard, and he
was always very straight
and did not joke around,
things like that.
So I thought are these guys
trying to kid me, or what?
So I went back to my book, and
then five minutes or so later,
I get another call.
This time, the same guard
is screaming into the phone,
and he's obviously frightened.
He's yelling into the phone.
He's not speaking his words.
He's yelling them.
And he says, we've got
all the guards out here.
They've all got
their weapons drawn.
I'm looking out
the front window,
and I see this
glowing, red object
that's elongated, oval-shaped,
pulsating red-orange light,
hovering just above
the front gate.
No noise.
Absolutely silent.
And they're scared to death.
In fact, recently I got
a report from someone,
which I have to validate--
but I'll mention it--
that one of the guards
did fire his weapon at it.
Now, there are other cases,
which I could mention later,
where weapons were fired at
these things to no avail.
>>REGINA: Well, of
course not, but I
guess it's an
instinctive response
if you're in the military.
Yeah.
>>SALAS: Right.
Right.
So he wanted me to tell
him what to do next.
Of course, I was shocked.
I didn't know what to tell him.
I'd never had an
experience like this.
I blurted out, don't let
anything inside the gate,
you know, the fenced area.
>>REGINA: Again, like
you would have a choice.
[LAUGHTER]
>>SALAS: Don't let them in!
>>REGINA: I mean, it's absurd
when you think about it.
>>SALAS: Yeah, it
was kind of absurd.
I actually thought we
were under some kind
of a terrorist attack.
I actually thought someone was
trying to enter the facility
and take it over.
I really did.
So after I told
him that, he said,
sir, my guard just got injured.
I'm going to have to go.
He hung up the phone.
I went over to talk to my
commander who was taking a rest
break on a little cot
we had down there.
I was about to tell him
about the phone calls
when we get all these bells
and whistles going off.
And literally, we have
klaxons down there.
We have lights.
We have a display board.
We all looked over
at the display board,
and sure enough, the missiles
were all going offline.
So all ten of them went
what we call no-go.
They could not be launched.
Now, it's important to emphasize
this was not a power failure.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>SALAS: We had power.
We had back-up power.
It was not a power failure.
>>REGINA: You're 60
feet under the ground,
inside steel and concrete.
>>SALAS: Right.
And these missiles were
independent of each other.
They were not dependent
on the other missiles.
In other words,
whatever was up there,
whatever object
was up there, had
to send a signal through 60
feet of earth and concrete
and then penetrate
triply shielded cables.
We had cabling systems going
to each of the missiles,
all shielded against EMI,
Electromagnetic Interference.
So they'd have to penetrate
that, send a specific signal.
Because on each
missile we queried--
and we had a system of
querying the missile--
they showed guidance and
control system failure.
So it was the same failure
mode on each missile.
>>REGINA: So Robert,
this is not the only time
this has happened either, and
in fact, a very similar thing
had just happened.
Let's talk about that one.
>>SALAS: That's right.
And on this, I need to tell you
that we had two things that we
needed to do right away.
One was report to
the command post.
So my commander did that back at
Great Falls, the Malmstrom Air
Force Base.
We were about 100
miles east of there.
The other thing is we had
two warning lights showing
that there was a possible
incursion at the launch
facility.
In other words--
>>REGINA: What's that mean?
>>SALAS: --we had proximity
locators, or motion detectors,
at the launch facilities where
the missiles were located.
And those had been lit up.
>>REGINA: Somehow breached.
Yeah.
>>SALAS: Somehow breached.
So we had to send
guards out there.
Well, anyway, my commander
Fred finishes reporting this
to the command post and
turns to me and says,
the same thing happened
at another flight.
Now--
>>REGINA: When say
another flight,
that means another area?
>>SALAS: Another launch control
center area, same set up,
10 missiles.
>>REGINA: And that was
called Echo, right?
>>SALAS: And that was
called Echo Flight.
That's right.
Now, at the time,
I thought he meant
the same thing had
happened that evening.
>>REGINA: I see.
>>SALAS: But what
he should have said
was the same thing
happened about a week ago.
And this was the
Echo Flight incident,
March 16, 1967, about
eight days earlier.
The Deputy Commander
was on alert status.
He gets an indication of a
missile shutdown on his board.
He calls out to the site
where we had maintenance crews
and security guards,
had spent the night,
and he thought that
they had gone ahead
and started their work by
shutting the missile down.
And he was going to complain
about that because they're
supposed to check with
him before they do that.
But they said, no, we
didn't do anything.
By the way, there are
UFOs above us right now.
>>REGINA: OK.
So this would beg a question.
I mean, I think anyone
watching this right now
would say, hm, March of
1967, what was going on
that such a display
needed to be made?
I'm asking you.
>>SALAS: That's a good question.
Of course, we were in the middle
of a Cold War with the Soviet
Union, well, actually all
the communist nations, China.
And of course, we were
engaged in Vietnam.
It was a tense time, but
after doing the research,
I found out an interesting fact.
>>REGINA: What?
>>SALAS: In 1967, we,
the United States,
had about 33,000 nuclear
weapons in our stockpile,
and this is the highest
total we have ever had.
So we were building
up-- we built up
a stockpile of nuclear weapons,
33,000, and then after '67,
we started on the downtrend.
>>REGINA: Hm.
So we were at the peak.
>>SALAS: We were at
the apex, at the peak
of our nuclear stockpile.
And I think our visitors--
I think these were
extraterrestrial visitors--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>SALAS: --knew that, and they
were getting very concerned.
>>REGINA: OK.
Now, this had to have made it
all the way around to the top,
I would think, of the
military in the United States.
These things would
not go unreported.
Once you made your reports, they
make theirs, they make theirs.
So if this was happening
in multiple locations,
then the guys at the
top knew about this.
>>SALAS: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: Did you
ever hear anything
about what the concerns
or comments were
within the military circles?
>>SALAS: Yes.
Well, two things--
one, we received--
you know, in 1994, I was able
to come forward with this,
so we requested, under the
Freedom of Information Act,
to retrieve documents.
And one of the
documents we retrieved
was a telex that said-- it
was from SAC headquarters,
Strategic Air Command
headquarters-- saying that we'd
had this incident
at Echo Flight.
All 10 missiles shut down
for some unknown reason.
And it was-- the
wording was something
like it was imperative that
we find out what caused this.
We know that SAC
headquarters, which
was General Curtis LeMay at
the time, knew about this.
And in fact, we have
also eyewitnesses
that were working
on the Echo Flight
to bring them back
up on alert status.
So there were a lot of
top brass at Echo Flight.
And by the way,
one of the men who
had worked on bringing the Echo
Flight back on alert-- and I
have to explain that the UFOs
did not damage the missiles.
All they did was send a signal
to the guidance and control
package to upset their
targeting system, basically.
We have an inertial
guidance system,
and this guidance system
was very sensitive.
It had to be set up properly.
They actually shot the stars
and made sure of the location.
This was before GPS.
And they used a little
collimator light
to set up the missile exactly
so that when it was launched,
the computer could compute its
track and then be on target.
So one of these men
went out to the site
and had a guard upstairs,
and he went down
with his little checklist.
And he started his
procedure for the startup.
And halfway into that, the
guard shakes the ladder leading
upstairs, and he points up.
The guard's scared to death.
He points up, and there's this
glowing, red ball of light.
He described it as an
orange-red ball of light
that was just above him.
And this man--
we'll call him Tex,
for lack of a better reason.
Because he still wants to remain
anonymous for good reason.
So he sees this ball of light
and decides to report it.
He tells the guard to
report it, but I've
got to go back and get
this missile back up.
OK.
We've got a ball of
orange light there.
So he goes back down, and
he starts on his procedure.
He gets to a particular
point in his checklist,
and the missile shuts
down again for no reason.
He goes through it
again and again.
>>REGINA: And again.
They shut it down
at the same point.
Yeah.
>>SALAS: Each time, at the same
point, the missile shut down.
So he concluded
that this object,
whatever it was-- and he could
feel the static electricity
coming down the
tube-- he concluded
that this thing, the
intelligence behind this thing,
knew exactly how
our systems worked.
>>REGINA: Before we go
into the next part, which
is really critical,
how did you feel
on more of an emotional
psycho-spiritual level
about what had happened?
I know your views have changed
over the years considerably.
At the time, how did you feel?
Was it a threat?
Did you see it as a threat?
>>SALAS: You know, I didn't
really see it as a threat.
I was very intrigued by it.
And then, of course, we
were muzzled right away.
The next day, we were ordered
never to talk about this.
>>REGINA: OK.
Now, this is where we're
getting into the next part.
We could just say on a clipboard
here, the great cover-up.
Because people say all the time,
I mean people in my family,
well, if there were UFOs and
this stuff happened, then
we'd be hearing about it.
The military--
we'd hear about it.
No, we wouldn't hear about it.
And you're going
to explain to us
just how-- the
anatomy of a cover-up.
>>SALAS: OK.
The anatomy of a cover-up.
Number one, the document
that they, basically,
forced me to sign stated that
I would be sent to prison
for many, many years,
fined and imprisoned,
if I ever told anybody
anything about this.
That was number one, and
that's pretty strong.
>>REGINA: That's
pretty intimidating.
Sure.
>>SALAS: That's
pretty intimidating.
And the other thing
they did-- and they
have done this frequently--
is any of the witnesses,
like those guards
upstairs, they never
returned to the same facility.
They dispersed them, not just
within Malmstrom Air Force
Base, but they sent
them to different bases.
>>REGINA: So they
couldn't talk about it,
couldn't reinforce it.
>>SALAS: Exactly.
They couldn't spread rumors,
and they kept track of them.
They knew who they were.
And so there is a core
group of, I think, mainly
intelligence people in
the Air Force, the Navy,
you name it, in government that
is controlling this secret.
At any rate, this cover-up
in particular, however,
and which I wasn't aware
of at the time-- in 1966,
the Air Force contracted with
the University of Colorado
and specifically
appointed Edward Condon
as the head of an
investigatory group.
>>REGINA: Which
became the infamous--
and I use the word
purposefully-- Condon Report.
>>SALAS: That's right, the
infamous Condon investigation.
And this was an
Air Force contract.
I think it was at least
a half a million dollars.
>>REGINA: A lot of
money in the day.
>>SALAS: A lot of
And this was actually instigated
by a congressional hearing.
And a lot of people don't
realize that in 1966 there
was a congressional
hearing on UFOs,
and it was ordered through
that that the Air Force go out
and investigate
the UFO phenomenon.
Well, at any rate, this
was all a white wash.
It was, right from
the beginning--
>>REGINA: And you say the
chief scientist was a chemistry
teacher at the university
and knew nothing.
>>SALAS: Well, the
chief investigator
was a chemistry teacher.
His name was Dr. Roy Craig.
>>REGINA: He knew nothing
about the phenomena.
>>SALAS: He knew nothing
about the phenomena
or how to investigate anything.
And in addition to that,
Condon, at the request
of Robert Lowe, who
was his deputy, who
kept saying to
Condon, you know, this
is really more of a
psychological problem.
And what you really
ought to have
is psychiatrists on your
team because anybody
that would report these things
has got to be a little off.
>>REGINA: No bias there, huh?
>>SALAS: No.
So right from the
beginning, it was a problem.
But the investigation
started in August of 1966.
They were just getting
organized by the start of '67,
and then our incidents
happened in March of '67.
The Air Force did not want
the Condon committee involved
at all, even though
this Dr. Craig had
heard about the shutdowns
and UFOs from a man
by the name of Ray Fowler, who
happened to work for Sylvania,
which was-- as an electrical
contractor for the Minuteman.
And he had contractors
in the field
at Malmstrom who had told
him that, yeah, there
were shutdowns of
missiles, and by the way,
UFOs were responsible.
And he had names, dates,
et cetera, of people
that he should interview.
>>REGINA: And he
spoke truthfully.
Right.
>>SALAS: Ray Fowler was great,
and he put his job on the line
to tell this story.
So he told Craig, the chief
investigator for the Condon
committee, about these things
and gave him names, dates.
Craig shows up in October of
'67, talks to the deputy base
commander-- I'm
sorry, base operations
officer, a man by the name of
Lieutenant Colonel Lewis Chase.
He wants to investigate this.
And Chase is
shocked that he even
knew about it because there was
a secret investigation going
on the Air Force was conducting.
So there was not only a civilian
investigation by Boeing,
but there was an internal Air
Force investigation also going
on, which was a
classified thing.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>SALAS: And that's exactly
what Chase told Craig.
He said, this is classified.
You are not to know
anything about this.
And here we've got--
>>REGINA: And he's supposed
to be investigating it.
>>SALAS: He's supposed
>>REGINA: So, OK, the whole
thing was a whitewash.
It was a sham.
The Condon Report was a joke.
>>SALAS: Yes.
>>REGINA: I mean,
everybody now--
it's gone down in
history as a joke.
>>SALAS: Right.
>>REGINA: No serious
effort was ever
made to study the phenomena.
To this day, it's
still not being made,
and here we are 50 years
later, practically.
>>SALAS: That's right.
>>REGINA: So, OK, we've
got a few minutes left.
You've had a lot of
experience since then.
You've had a lot of time
to think about this.
You went rogue after
a period of time,
and you broke that
security oath.
Was that something
that you just thought--
you woke up one day
and said, hey, I
can't hold this in anymore?
How did that work?
Because I know a lot
of the men really
suffered psychologically over
whether to break this security
oath.
>>SALAS: I didn't think I was
breaking an oath, to be honest.
The way I came forward was I
picked up a book in a library
in 1994 called
"Above Top Secret."
I happened to turn to page 301.
>>REGINA: Oh, yes, I've
interviewed Timothy Good.
>>SALAS: And on
page 301, it says
missiles were shut down during
a UFO encounter at Malmstrom Air
Force base in 1967.
>>REGINA: There it is.
It's already out there.
>>SALAS: There it is.
It's out there.
I can talk about it now.
And that's what I thought.
>>REGINA: So that really
gave you permission.
>>SALAS: Well, I
was not sure yet.
And so I kind of
couched my approach--
I approached MUFON,
Mutual UFO Network,
investigator James Klotz
in Seattle and said,
look, I'd like you
to submit an FOI
request about this
Echo shut down,
but don't say
anything about UFOs
and don't mention
my name please.
Just do it on your own.
Lo and behold, we receive
a reply from the Air Force.
They say this incident
is still classified.
However, since
it's been so long,
we're going to
declassify it, and we'll
send you some documents
related to it.
>>REGINA: So there you go.
>>SALAS: So there go.
Some documents
started coming in.
At that time, I thought
I was at Echo Flight.
As it turns out, I was
not at Echo Flight.
But they started sending
documents, so I went public.
I actually went on
"Sightings" program.
I don't know if you
remember that one.
>>REGINA: No, I
don't, but anyway--
>>SALAS: It's before your time.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
I met you a few years
later at Disclosure,
which was probably
some six years later.
>>SALAS: Right.
So I started speaking
on the radio, et cetera.
I start calling people,
talking about this.
So I basically had gone public.
>>REGINA: Were you ever visited?
Were you ever told to be
quiet, or did they just
leave you alone
from that point on?
>>SALAS: Well,
that's a long story,
but yeah, I'll just say there
were times when I felt coerced.
>>REGINA: Yes, I would
think you would be.
Yeah.
>>SALAS: It wasn't
until 1996 that I
realized I was not
at Echo Flight.
I was at Oscar Flight
and on a different night.
>>REGINA: Separate event.
>>SALAS: Seperate event.
>>REGINA: Not the
one they'd been
writing about in
"Above Top Secret."
>>SALAS: No, so
technically, I am still
in violation of my
oath, but at that point,
I decided to keep going.
I had gone public,
and I said, you know,
I really would like
to get this out.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And so what's happened in
those intervening years?
You've experienced a lot.
James Gilliland was telling me
you've been up to the ranch.
And you've kind of experienced
phenomena yourself now.
And just as a kind of
wrap, from the time when
you were so young to now,
almost 50 years ago to today,
what has come to be your
viewpoint on what the UFO's
participation is, what
they were trying to do,
and what you feel
they're trying to do now?
>>SALAS: Yeah, I came
to the early conclusion,
after going public,
after a year or two,
that I was convinced--
what they did, in my case,
was just send a
message, and the message
was get rid of your
nuclear weapons.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>SALAS: They're really
not weapons of war.
I hope you understand
they're not weapons of war.
They're weapons of
mass destruction.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>SALAS: You don't use these in
wartime as a tactical weapon.
>>REGINA: It's
about annihilation.
>>SALAS: It's about
annihilation of masses--
huge masses of humanity.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>SALAS: I came to that
conclusion early on.
And then, as far as
the phenomenon itself,
the UFO phenomenon--
by the way, I've
become committed--
up to this point,
I'm still very committed to the
abolition of nuclear weapons
everywhere.
So that's one of the
reasons I do interviews,
I speak out at
conferences, and I'm
going to continue to do
that as long as I can.
But as far as the phenomenon
itself, of course, I
had other experiences,
and I'd met other people.
And by the way, I've
got a new book out,
which will be out in September
called "Unidentified: The UFO
Phenomenon," by New Page Books.
I have evolved.
I certainly have
evolved in my opinion
of different kinds of stories.
At first-- I'm a
real left-brainer,
and I just dismissed
most of what
I heard from other people, these
crazy stories of abductions
and things like that.
But I've certainly
evolved to where
I'm much more accepting
of a lot of things.
>>REGINA: On that
note, thank you
so much for speaking
with us about it.
I really appreciate
your time, Robert.
>>SALAS: Thank you.
Thank you.
[THEME MUSIC]